# Unit 7: Editing and Montage 

## Overview

Congratulations. You’ve made your first mini-movie in this course. Don’t worry if it did not live up to your expectations. The important thing for right now is that you wrote, produced, directed, and shot a short film and that you are improving your skills. The rest of your course will give you a chance to explore more elements of filmmaking and gain more experience.

In this unit you will focus on editing and creating a montage, a common form of filmmaking.

Unlike the previous project, you can now use dialogue, voice over, music, and sound effects to enhance your short film project. You will also use editing which will allow you to shoot your film out of order and then assemble it after you have all of the elements you need to make it.

As you saw in Unit 2, editing is the third major phase of filmmaking and a major skill to understand.

Don’t worry if you do not want to be an editor. You will work in teams this time and as long as the work on the film is shared equally between yourself and your partner(s), you can offer editing suggestions but will not have to push the buttons. (This is how it works in the industry where the director and producer tell the editor what they want and the editor does the technical work.)

## Topics

This unit is divided into the following topics covered in the course text:

  - Post-Production Workflow

  - Montage

  - Picture Cutting Techniques

  - Types of Montage

  - Digital Video Editing Software

  - Steps for Creating Your Montage

  - Pitching Your Montage Project

  - Steps for Creating Your Montage

## Learning Outcomes

When you have completed this unit, you should be able to:

  - Define the Post-Production workflow

  - Describe how to pitch a project well

  - Analyze the necessary elements needed for your montage

  - Determine the steps needed in making a montage

  - Create an effective montage

  - Evaluate the quality of a montage

## Activity Checklist

Here is a checklist of learning activities you will benefit from in completing this unit. You may find it useful for planning your work.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th></th>
<th><strong>Activities TO BE FILLED IN</strong></th>
<th><strong>Time</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td><blockquote>
<p>Activity 2.1:</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td><blockquote>
<p>Activity 2.2:</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td><blockquote>
<p>Activity 2.3:</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td><blockquote>
<p>Activity 2.4:</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td><blockquote>
<p><strong>Assignment 2:</strong></p>
</blockquote></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Resources

Here are the resources you will need to complete this unit.

  - **Stages of Post Production for Filmmaking in Cinema**, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IFjyVW21Vpw>

  - “20 Montages That Might Be The Best Part Of The Movie,” <https://www.refinery29.com/en-us/best-movie-montages>

  - Chapter Seven course text

  - ***How To Pitch A Project***, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dak2DkfDTuU>

  - **Cuts & Transitions 101**, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAH0MoAv2CI&t=31s>

  - **9 Cuts Every Video Editor Should Know | Filmmaking Tips,** <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wv3Hmf2Dxlo>

  - **VIDEO EDITING TRANSITIONS (Taylor Cut Tutorial),** <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bdpbYeoZKnk>

  - **Critiquing Your Short Films**, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x5ASDkOSIBE>

  - Other online resources provided in the course text and this unit

### Learning Activity

#### Activity 7.1: Journal entry

Imagine you’ve just completed filming a short movie. You’ve shot all of your footage. Now what? How do you get from a completed production stage, to something worthy of viewing for an audience? Jot down a couple of ideas of what you think is involved in the Post-Production stage and how you go about it.

## Topic 1: Post-Production Workflow 

There are many steps and elements involved in the post-production process. They include:

  - Importing Footage and elements

  - Sound syncing

  - Picture cutting

  - Transitions

  - Dialogue editing

  - Sound design

  - Adding music

  - Adding sound effects

  - Adding visual and special effects

  - Color correcting

  - Adding tiles and graphics

  - Etc.

### Learning Activities

#### Activity 7.2: Read, Reflect and View

Read the first section in Chapter 7, the Post-Production Work Flow. For a detailed overview of the post-production process view the following resource: **Stages of Post Production for Filmmaking in Cinema**, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IFjyVW21Vpw>

*Note that this learning activity is ungraded, but is designed to help you succeed in your assessments in this course.*

## Topic 2: Montage 

Montage involves a type of editing where a series of images and sound elements are most often used used to condense time, create emotion, tell a story, reveal something from the past, promote something, or impart information.

Montages can stand alone or be part of a larger documentary, film or television story, or a stand-alone film.

You will focus on a montage project in this unit because they are a great way to learn the art of editing when you shoot images and edit them in timed rhythm to music, dialogue, and/or sound effects. In this exercise you are going to let emotions, feelings, and mood guide you as you learn to further develop your intuitive creative skills.

### Learning Activities

#### Activity 7.3: …

Read the second section of your text on the Montage. To get a feeling for how montages work and for how effective they can be view this resource:

“20 Montages That Might Be The Best Part Of The Movie,” <https://www.refinery29.com/en-us/best-movie-montages>

## Topic 3: Picture Cutting Techniques 

This montage project is helpful because you have to focus on a few elements: the images you will use and the music and/or sound effects that will provide the beats and rhythm for your picture cutting.

Although the music will guide your editing as you cut on beats, the images you edit will be important. Once again, good composition and motivate motions shots will play a vital role as you shot your footage for your montage project. You can also used “found” or archival footage, or news stories as your visual sources in a montage.

There are many types of cuts and transitions that can be used in a montage as you splice and stich your footage together including:

  - **Cuts**

  - **Jump-Cuts**

  - **Cross-Cutting**

  - **Dissolves**

  - **Wipes**

  - **Fades**

You can use J-cut and L-cuts when you are working with dialogue or you want to lead into a new shot or scene or carry the audio to a new shot or scene. If you are interested in doing this, see:

Film Making 101 Tutorial - L & J Cuts, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PAvJevWUVsc&t=2s>

### Learning Activities

***Activity 7.4:***

THESE NEED TO BE EMBEDDED

Read the text section on Picture Cutting Techniques. For visual examples of the above techniques view this resource: **Cuts & Transitions 101**, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAH0MoAv2CI&t=31s>

See also: **9 Cuts Every Video Editor Should Know | Filmmaking Tips**, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wv3Hmf2Dxlo>

## Topic 4: Types of Montage Projects 

You are given creative latitude and freedom for the type of montage you will shoot and edit for this unit. Some of the most popular ones include:

**Poetic Montages**

**Nature Montages**

**Street Montages**

**Sequence Sprint**

**Music Videos**

**Aesthetic Montages**

You can also combine these types of montages. As you read the description of these different types, have fun choosing the one you want to do.

### Learning Activities

***Activity 7.5:***

Read the Types of Montage Projects in the textbook. For an excellent example of a nature and time-lapse montage where a series of images are synced in to a powerful sound track view this resource: **Pursuit -** **A 4K storm time-lapse film**, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oagszCmJLpU>

As you view it, pay attention to the way the types and rhythms of the images flow and work in sync with the music and sound effects especially from 2: 29 onward.

What did you learn about this montage? Log this in your journal.

## Topic 5: Digital Video Editing Software 

You are now at a point where you will have to import your cellphone or DSLR footage into a software program that will allow you to edit it. Digital video editing software is helpful because it allows you to edit your images and sync them to the rhythm and beats of your sound track and export your project for viewing or streaming on the Internet.

There are many types and brands of editing software in the marketplace and you will have to choose the one that works for you. Some applications only work with Android-based cellphones and others for Apple ISO devices and some for both platforms such as imovie. If you want to really get series about editin you should explore Final Cut Pro, Adobe Premiere, Avid, DaVinci Resolve, or some other professional program.

There are similarities among editing software and programs but you will have to do a tutorial on YouTube or the manufacture’s website of the one you will use to see how to work it. The more popular the software, the more tutorials will be available.

### Learning Activities

***Activity 7.6:***

Read the Digital Editing Software section in the text.

Find the digital video editing program you want to use and learn how to do basic editing with it. Basic editing using cuts, dissolves, fades, and wipes titling will be all you need to learn for your montage project. The Filmora website gives an overview of the type of features you want to look for in video editing software: <https://filmora.wondershare.net/filmora-video-editor.html?gclid=Cj0KCQjwvdXpBRCoARIsAMJSKqIlTxG4fGMlWHTHsBPoUVzFuLky1e9MATKGx5Ju5Cu356k9li7lJLwaAj2JEALw_wcB>

For free and inexpensive Android-based video software see: “10 Best Android Video Editor Apps Of 2019,” <https://fossbytes.com/best-android-video-editor-apps/> Or search for best cellphone or DSLR video editing software such as “Best Picks 12 Best Video Editing Apps for Phones and Tablets,” <https://www.tomsguide.com/us/pictures-story/511-best-video-editing-apps.html>

**Note**: When you pitch your montage project, see who already has editing software and who knows how to use it and try to join with them if you are a bit of a “tech-phobic.” If you can’t find someone, challenge yourself and learn something new. You will learn and grow a lot doing this.

## Topic 6: Pitching Your Montage Project 

Because the montage project is more complicated, you are encouraged to work in teams to create an excellent montage. You can do the project solo if you feel you have the experience and understanding of the gear and software to create it.

The reason almost all larger-scale film projects are done in teams with a lot of different crew positions is that over time, people specialize in their skill-sets and bring better expertise to a project. This is why film crews have a cinematographer, production designer, wardrobe, hair and make-up specialists, prop masters, special effects experts, etc. (You should be consulting your film terms website if you do not know these positions.)

For this project, ideally you will have a team of two people. One to come up with the concept and film it and the other to edit it. In reality, both members will share the idea development, shooting, and editing. The important thing is that you both share equally in the work. (In some cases if the montage is highly complex or sophisticated you can have 3 or 4 members on the team as long as everyone does their fair share.)

In order to find the find teammate, you will pitch your project to the class to see who wants to work on it.

Pitching is a process central to the film and television industry. It involves an individual or team presenting their film project concept and why it is important and to a special audience such as a producer, agent, studio or television executive, distributor, film competition, etc. Everyone, no matter how big or important, has to pitch to those in the industry to find the money, resources, actors, crew, and/or distribution for their project.

Pitching is a vital part of filmmaking and it is a great transferable skill to learn since you will have to pitch in many professions and industries today.

### Learning Activities

***Activity 7.7:***

You will have to develop a montage concept to pitch such as a day in the life of street vendors, or a music video, or visualizing a poem or something from the Bible. So review the brainstorming techniques in the previous unit and come up with at least 10 concepts and then choose the one that most appeals to you.

Then review the section on Pitching in Chapter Two of the course text. Study How to Pitch Your Montage Project and Steps for an Effective Pitch in the Chapter 7 and practice doing your pitch before a friend or family member or to an imaginary audience before making the actual pitch to your course members.

**Note**: Do not skimp on practicing your pitch. The more you practice it you will gain confidence and know how to present your concept in an effective way.

## Topic 7: Steps for Creating Your Montage

Once you have your montage project and team in place, you are ready to make your montage. As we have seen, there are three main phases of film production and they will apply here:

  - Montage Pre-Production

  - Montage Production

  - Montage Post-Production

The lion’s share of the emphasis in the chapter has been on post-production, but this does not mean you must take lightly your pre-production and production work. Your montage will only be as good as the images you have for it.

### Learning Activities

***Activity 7.8:***

Read the next section of Chapter 7 on creating a montage. As you study montage pre-production, production, and post-production make notes on your shooting script of what to watch out for and not forget as you film the shots and images you will use.

#### \[Note for Ned – if this next activity is assessed, let’s put it in the Assessment section\]

***Activity 7.9:Feedback and Self-Assessment for Montage Project***

Once you have edited your project and exported it, you are ready to show it to your classmates and instructor. This should be an exciting time as you screen the fruits of your labor and creativity.

As mentioned previously, film is a public medium and subject to critique and evaluation.

The following criteria can help us better evaluate our own work and that of others and to give constructive criticism on how to improve:

  - Overall did the montage work?

  - Did the music and/or sound effects work well with the images?

  - Did the montage convey a mood, emotion, a story and/or theme (some insight into life)? If so, what was it?

  - Were the shots well composed, motivated, and appropriately smooth or in some cases jarring depending on what is being communicated?

  - Were the cuts timed well? If not, where did they not work well?

  - Were the transitions appropriate and effective?

  - Was the action followed well?

  - Was there a sufficient variety of shots?

  - Were some shots or images too repetitive?

  - Were the shots and images interesting and noteworthy?

  - What did you like best about the project?

  - What suggestions would you offer to make it better?

Evaluate and critique the work of your peers helping them to see what worked and did not work in their montage and why. When possible give suggestions of how something could have been done better. Remember the tone and substance of our critiques should be one that offers encouraging constructive insight and that helps each other to grow and improve their craft.

> **Helpful Tip**: For insight into how to critique a short film see: **Critiquing Your Short Films**, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x5ASDkOSIBE>.

Write in your journal what you learned about your project and yourself from the montage projects.

Use the following questions to guide you:

  - What was the best lesson I learned?

  - What did I do well? Why?

  - What did not work out as well as I planned? Why?

  - What can I do better next time?

  - What was the quality of my experience working with a partner?

  - If I did not work with a partner, could the project have been better if I had one?

  - How did this experience help me grow as a person and as a professional?

  - What did I learn new about myself?

Be sure to note which films and filmmakers had the best cinematography, editing, story, creativity, etc. so that you can consult this when you vote on the awards at the end of the course.

## Unit 7 Summary

In this unit, you learned about…

  - Post-Production Workflow

  - Montage

  - Picture Cutting Techniques

  - Types of Montage

  - Digital Video Editing Software

  - Steps for Creating Your Montage

  - Pitching Your Montage Project

  - Steps for Creating Your Montage

  - Feedback and Self-Assessment for Montage Project

## Assessment

**Grade Assessment**

This montage project will account for 30 percent of your grade and will be broken down according to the following:

  - Story/Montage Concept: 20%

  - Cinematography: 20%

  - Editing: 40%

  - Overall all project quality: 20%

#### Grading Criteria:

…

## Checking your Learning

Before you move on to the next unit, you may want to check to make sure that you are able to:

  - Define the Post-Production workflow

  - Describe how to pitch a project well

  - Analyze the necessary elements needed for your montage

  - Determine the steps needed in making a montage

  - Create an effective montage

  - Evaluate the quality of a montage

HERE ARE THE GUIDELINES FOR THE MONTAGE PROJECT

**MCOM 221**

**Guidelines for Montage Project**

**Assignment Goal**: The goal of this assignment will be to explore how to make an effective montage-based film that uses picture and sound to convey meaning, emotion, story, character, and/or mood.

<span class="underline">Criteria for Montage Exercise</span>

1.  Create a 2 to 4 min. short film that relies on montage to convey its meaning. This film can involve a flashback, an action sequence, time-lapse images, visualizing a poem, creating a romantic mood, a voice over story, etc.

2.  Your montage can be any genre such drama, comedy, action, horror, romance, etc.

3.  This film can use dialogue, music, and sound effects to help create the emotion, meaning, mood, ideas, insights, story, etc. that you want to convey.

4.  Your project can be a music video, “visualizing” a poem or other text; physicalizing an inner monologue/Voice over; or a sequence that is romantic or fits the action, thriller, horror, etc. genre. You can also put us “in the shoes” of someone such as the experience of being homeless or a drug addict, or lonely.

5.  More specifically, the goal is for you to plan and discover audio/visual correlations for the text, concept, issue, or idea you will explore. You thus are free to experiment with lighting, camera angles, composition, motion shots, the manipulation of time and space, visual thematics, etc. Your finished piece will be edited using picture and sound that match well.

6.  Find appropriate locations, props, activities, symbols, and justify and motivate the way you use the cinematography, *mise-en-scene*, and editing style to reflect and enhance what you want to convey. Put another way, this project can help you to start focusing on taking control of the “look” and having a unified style within your film. Don’t worry if you are not ready to do this yet. But if you can, try.

7.  Be sure to focus on camera motivation and fluidity and a flow of appropriate shots and transitions. Put another way, be sure to focus on the appropriate rhythm, variety and type of shots and editing transitions that fit the story, theme, music, genre, you are presenting. For example, the use of hand-held jump cuts in an action sequence or lyrical dissolves in a romantic sequence.

8.  You can do this project individually or work with a team member as long as the work is equally shared among the writing, producing, directing, shooting, editing, etc.

9.  Submit a write-up detailing what you sought to do, your role(s) on project and that of your team member, and what you learned from the project. Be sure to label this project appropriately in your Cloud Folder. The link for this will be provided. You must submit your write-up at least 45 min. before the start of the due date of this project to: <ned.vankevich@twu.ca>

10. Please proof your write up so that it reads clearly.

11. You must label your write-up with Your Name, Course Name and Section, Assignment Name. E.g., Walter Murch, MCOM 221FR, Montage Project.

> At the top of your write up please include the following information:
> 
> Your name:
> 
> Student ID:
> 
> Teammates: (if applicable)
> 
> Roles Served:
> 
> Project Title:
> 
> Genre
> 
> Logline: (describing your montage in a sentence or two)

12. Unharness your imagination and have fun.

13. Questions?
